---
layout: post
title:  "Real Time Operating System for Arduino"
date:   2018-01-21 19:19:00 +0100
excerpt: ""
categories: rtos 
---

Fundamental responsibility of Robobo is to provide dynamic control over DC
motors. That means Arduino needs to timely respond to input signal and provide
concurrent control for multiple `DCMotors`. In terms of *dynamic* Arduino
based controller is also to provide control in designated time slot. Three
items: 
- Concurrency
- Timing events 
- Determinism

Above functions are delivered to Robobo by using
[FreeRTOS](https://www.freertos.org/). This article will provide introductory
information on [RTOS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real-time_operating_system)
usage in embedded applications.


# Operating System
Many of you when hearing the term *Operating System* envision system like
Windows or Linux. You might envision it as program where you start your
applications, games and whole ecosystem that allows to run them concurrently.
OS is also responsible for basic networking services, logging, hardware
monitoring and on top of that provides access to persistent data. For our
Arduino Mega case study there is no way to get close to such functionality. We
don't have a room for all of these services. [Arduino
Mega](https://store.arduino.cc/usa/arduino-mega-2560-rev3) provides us only
about 256 kB for our program. Either way we still require essence of
concurrency and timers. OS I selected is FreeRTOS. It satisfies Robobo
requirements and it is RTOS after all. 


# FreeRTOS
Unlike Windows, Linux or Android, FreeRTOS is not a stand alone application.
Basically FreeRTOS doesn't provide you any support application other than just
ecosystem. This ecosystem is a framework which you can use with your
application. You link your application directly with FreeRTOS kernel. By doing
this you get an embedded program as whole. 

Thanks to gentlemen [Phillip Stevens](https://github.com/feilipu) we got
FreeRTOS customized for Arduino Mega. This FreeRTOS customization is ready to
pickup even from Arduino IDE.

FreeRTOS is highly customizable. Basically you pick up a kernel core and then
you might pick up other components such as file system support or IP stack. For
our case at the moment we will use only core of FreeRTOS. 

One more advantage of FreeRTOS is [AWS](https://aws.amazon.com/freertos/)
compatibility which was recently built-in into FreeRTOS. That proves that
FreeRTOS will be supported for long time because Amazon span umbrella over
project.

# Real Time Operating System Scheduling 

Difference between RTOS and regular OS is determinism. This means when RTOS
application is triggered by some external event we can predict when response
for such event will occur. This is essence. Please note that in regular operating
systems it is not true.

Lets go back to servo
[post](https://leszek-wojcik.github.io/robobo/arduino/servo/encoder/pololu/hbridge/pid/2017/12/29/servo.html).
Spouse that encoder reading happens and motor is still running. Lets say we
would like to stop motor shaft moving because current position is
satisfying. We need to stop H-Bridge and we need to do it timely. Otherwise shaft
will still move without intention. Suppose also there are other things that
are executing on Arduino. For instance Arduino is also providing LCD
indication of motor movement to user. Here comes biggest difference between RTOS and
other OSes.  In RTOS we can predict that upon event Arduino will take immediate
care about DC motor and postpone LCD action. We cannot say same happen on
non-RTOS.  Usually non-RTOS are concerned about user experience or throughput
rather than on determinism. 

One of the critical thing in OSes is scheduling. Whenever OS determines that
there are two concurrent tasks ready to be running it has to select one of
them. Please note that single core CPU allows to run one at the time. 

In other words scheduler is OS algorithm for task assignment to execution.
Depending on what OS is, different scheduling principles are taken.  In server
based environment Linux tries to accomplish scheduler fairness. That means that
Linux tries to divide CPU power equally among processes. This is mostly
valuable scheduling principles in Server world as you don't want to starve any
of services. From control perspective scheduler fairness is not acceptable.
Object controlling is usually far more important that any other activity that
happens in background. If controlling requires much more CPU than other tasks
scheduler will grant it.

Usually RTOS meets determinism by having priorities assigned for every task.
Whenever task with higher priority wishes to run, scheduler is assigning
CPU for high priority task and postpones lower priority task for later execution. 

As a side note I will just mention that determinism and responsiveness is extra
cost for CPU and truly there are limited scenarios where you actually need it.  

# FreeRTOS on Arduino

I would like to give some code snippets that will just highlight how FreeRTOS
fits into real time scheduling. Whenever new task is created:

```c
BaseType_t xTaskCreate(    TaskFunction_t pvTaskCode,
                            const char * const pcName,
                            unsigned short usStackDepth,
                            void *pvParameters,
                            UBaseType_t uxPriority,
                            TaskHandle_t *pxCreatedTask
                          );
```
Main task function is defined in `pvTaskCode` and upon task created 
programmer assign strict priority `uxPriority` which is then used for
scheduling. 

In future post I will describe object oriented approach for FreeRTOS
instrumentation.

# Summary

In this post I described what RTOS is and justified rationale why FreeRTOS was
selected for Robobo. 

